<section>
Contact
 John Rizcallah
 400 S Lee St
 Lakewood, CO 80226
 8064106750 (Mobile)
 john.rizcallah@gmail.com
 www.linkedin.com/in/john-rizcallah
 (LinkedIn)
 github.com/jrizcallah (Portfolio)
<section>
 Top Skills
 Research Design
 Business Research
 Forecasting
 Certifications
 Data Science Career Track
 Tensorflow Data and Deployment
 SAS for R Users
 Kx Introductory Workshop
 Neo4j Graph Data Science
 Fundamentals
<section>
 John Rizcallah
 Quantitative Researcher | Data Scientist | Machine Learning
 Specialist | Statistician | Communicator
 Denver, Colorado, United States
<section>
 Summary
 Curiosity may have killed the cat, but in this case it makes the man.
 I am passionate about finding answers, and about asking questions.
 The harder the questions, the better. I love researching new topics,
 exploring new areas, and connecting my personal experience with
 the matter at hand.
 I remember the exact moment I decided to change my major to
 mathematics. I was reading an article that said that Actuaries are
 among the happiest people in their jobs. On beanactuary.org, I found
 a practice exam in which there was a triple integral. It seemed so
 hard... I changed my major to mathematics immediately. Several
 years later, I passed the first two actuarial exams (Probability and
 Financial Mathematics). It was the challenge of that practice test that
 drove me toward who I am today. I love a challenge.
 In college, this pushed me to strive for more and more expertise,
 choosing complex projects and delivering exceptional work. I wound
 my way through several majors at several universities before finding
 my way to mathematics, statistics, and machine learning. My time
 spent studying psychology, music, emergency medicine, finance,
 and philosophy has been tremendously beneficial; it allows me to
 see interactions between theoretical mathematics and the real world.
 For my master's thesis, I used my understanding of economics
 in tandem with my expertise in Bayesian statistics to implement
 a data-driven, semi-supervised method for stamping bubbles in
 foreign exchange rates. I also used my understanding of quantitative
 trading to devise and backtest several trading strategies based on
 the bubble-stamping method. I programmed the particle filter and
 backtest in R. I wrote my thesis in R Markdown, too.
 Toward the end of grad school, I joined Springboard to round out
 my theoretical education with the real-world skills data scientists
 use every day. In the Springboard program, I learned Python,
 SQL, NLP. More importantly, I learned to tell stories and make
 recommendations using data. That's how data affects lives and
 businesses.
 In my previous work as a teacher, salesman, and musician, I always
 knew that the best part was talking to strangers. Speaking and
 listening to others are deeply important skills. As much as I love
 asking and answering questions, doing research, devising and
 implementing models, I think there would be something missing if I
 never got to share them.
<section>
Experience
 Kalibri Labs
 Data Scientist
 July 2022 - May 2024 (1 year 11 months)
 Maintain and enhance production algorithms; performing statistical and
 business research when necessary.
 Projects completed:- Reduced running time of the Optimization algorithm by up to 80%- Designed and coded an algorithm that leverages the Google API to
 deduplicate low-quality string data into fuzzy groups, then map those groups
 to specific corporate names with 93% accuracy in both the deduplication and
 mapping steps- Increased speed, efficiency, and security of a production algorithm,
 decreasing execution time by approximately 20%- Completely overhauled the unit testing process, writing detailed unit tests for
 over 100 functions- Researched production algorithm inputs/outputs, translating into business
 logic to make the algorithm explainable to clients- Devised, documented, and implemented an entirely new, automated
 hyperparameter tuning system- Implemented a client health (customer churn) model using Salesforce data
 to estimate the likelihood of user churn; automating a process than took ~70
 hours per month and making it data-driven
  - Conducted extensive forecasting experiments, testing dozens of scalers,
 models, and architectures, using Optuna for hyperparameter tuning, that
 addressed behavioral problems and was showing promising performance
 results.
 Springboard
 Data Science Fellowship
 September 2020 - March 2021 (7 months)
 To be completed by March, 2021:
 • Fulfill 550+ hours of the hands-on data science training
 • Complete 2 in-depth capstone projects under the personal guidance of an
 experience Data Science Mentor
 • Master skills in Python, SQL, data analysis, data visualization, hypothesis
 testing, and machine learning
 Ensemble Reinforcement Learning for Futures Trading · Present
 • Loaded, cleaned. and prepared price data on 78 futures contracts
 • Coded training, validation, and trading environments for use with OpenAI
 Gym
 • Implemented A2C, PPO, and DDPG reinforcement learning algorithms to
 create three trading models • Ensemble Trading System still in development
 • Current Metrics: Sharpe Ratio of 1.006, Annualized Return of 4.5%,
 Maximum Drawdown of -0.25
 Sentiment in Reporting: A data driven analysis of bias in 15 major publications
 • Devised a data science workflow with minimal analyst input, thereby
 removing analyst bias from the results
 • Analyzed sentiment in over 140,000 articles using the VADER Lexicon
 algorithm
 • Compared publications by Linear Regression, ANOVA, and Tukey HSD
 testing
 • Explored relationships between publications using Agglomerative
 Hierarchical Clustering, K-Means Clustering, and DBSCAN
 • Research performed in Python. See Projects section for more details.
 West Texas A&M University
 Graduate Teaching Assistant
 August 2019 - May 2020 (10 months)
 Canyon, Texas, United States
 • Explained complex mathematical techniques in simple terms
 • Lectured to classes of 30+ people
 • Achieved a pass-ratio over 50% in developmental classes
 Amarillo ISD
 Substitute Teacher
 January 2018 - May 2019 (1 year 5 months)
 Amarillo, Texas Area
 • Managed Classrooms of 30+ students
 • Served in an on-call capacity
 • Worked in multiple subject areas
 Rock Bottom (band)
 Lead Vocalist
 May 2016 - January 2019 (2 years 9 months)
 Amarillo, Texas
 • Sang and played guitar as needed
 • Performed for large groups
 • Interacted with strangers
 • Learned and retained a large number of songs
 Surfin' 66 (band)
 Lead Vocalist
 January 2016 - January 2017 (1 year 1 month)
 Amarillo, Texas
 Club Z! In-Home Tutoring Services
 Mathematics Tutor
 January 2016 - August 2016 (8 months)
 Amarillo, Texas Area
 Independent Contractor
 Mathematics Tutor
 August 2010 - January 2013 (2 years 6 months)
 • Evaluated client needs and expectations
 • Trained students to use mathematical logic and methods
 • Marketed to potential clients
 • Developed personalized lesson plans
 • Scheduled tutoring sessions
<section>
Education
 Springboard
 Certification, Data Science · (2020 - 2021)
 West Texas A&M University
 Master's degree, Mathematics · (2018 - 2020)
 West Texas A&M University
 Bachelor’s Degree, Mathematics · (2015 - 2017)
 Amarillo College
 Associate’s Degree, Mathematics · (2012 - 2015)